Cancer in cats

Signs and symptoms
Cancer in cats can occur in any location or body system, and most symptoms can be detected externally. While each type of cancer has its own distinctive symptoms, most indicate their presence by the occurrence and the prolonged presence of any common symptom. Some of the general symptoms of cancer in cats are:
Lymphoma and lymphosarcoma
Lymphoma is the most common form of cancer in cats, which is often associated with feline leukemia virus, and accounts for 25 percent of all cases. Feline lymphoma usually strikes the digestive system, causing excessive vomiting and diarrhea. Other common symptoms of lymphoma in cats include swollen lymph nodes, loss of appetite, weight loss, and difficulty breathing.
Lymphoma and lymphosarcoma is common among cats with FeLV infections. It affects the intestines and other lymphatic tissues (commonly the abdominal organs). Cats with these cancers may be affected by a loss of appetite, weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea, bloody stool, and constipation.
Skin tumors
Skin tumors are less common in cats; and although most cats are vulnerable, white cats are especially prone to this type of tumor. Skin tumors manifest as a visible lump on the skin, mostly affecting vision, smell, or eating. Benign tumors take several years to develop and are more difficult to detect due to their freely movable nature. The only indicator of benign tumors is self-trauma of a form called lick granuloma or "boredom sores", which can be caused by excessive licking by the cat. This is a sign that the cat is suffering from anxiety.
Mammary gland tumors
Mammary gland tumors are the third common type of cancer in older female cats, with the most common symptom manifesting as a lump in the breast tissue. Domestic short-haired cats and Siamese appear to have a higher incident rates. The tumor is typically firm and nodular, and adheres to the overlying skin. Nipples may also appear to be red and swollen, oozing yellowish fluid.
Despite the overall poor prognosis of feline mammary carcinomas, in one study some cats survived >6 months, indicating that adjuvant treatment may be an option to consider in metastatic disease.
Abdominal tumor
Abdominal tumor is among the rarest forms of cancer in cats, and most difficult to treat successfully before progressing to an advanced stage. The main symptoms include abdominal enlargement, vomiting (often with blood), weight loss due to poor digestion, and weakness.

Diagnosis
Diagnosing the type of cancer, by the analysis of the structure of the tumor and cancer cells, helps determine the best treatment.

Treatment
Treatments of cancer in cats usually consists of diagnosis and observation of the tumor to determine its type and size, the development of a treatment plan, the associated goals on the part of the treatment methods, and the regular evaluation of the overall health of the pet.