Flat-chested kitten syndrome

Onset and diagnosis
FCKS develops usually in kittens around three days of age, and sometimes affects whole litters, sometimes only individuals or part of a litter. Kittens can go flat any time during early maturation, some flattening as late as 10 days of age or (in very rare cases) later. It is possible that the later-developing cases are due to Respiratory tract infection or pneumonia. Until 2010 FCKS was believed to be caused by a spasm in the intercostal muscles, but re-examination of old post-mortem data (i.e. that kittens remain flat even when they are dead and therefore cannot maintain a muscular spasm) and new data has led to the conclusion that flattening is caused by failure of the lungs to inflate normally or, when it occurs in older kittens, by lung collapse. This cause is now cited by the veterinary community (Sturgess 2016) but without any source acknowledgement.
Gross physical symptoms include flattening of the underside of the thorax in moderate cases (a ridge can usually be felt along the sides of the ribcage, running parallel to the spine); complete flattening of the upper body in extreme cases (the kitten looks as if it has been stepped on); moderate to extreme effort and/or gasping during breathing; the gut is drawn upwards during the in-breath. Breathing is not usually rapid (as in pneumonia or pyrexia) but at a normal rate when compared with unaffected kittens. The position of the thorax and activity of the abdomen is not unlike that seen during normal hiccups, but the sudden spasm in hiccups is slowed down or halted in FCKS: where a hiccup releases, returning the body to a normal position, FCKS breathing does not release. There may be involvement with digestive difficulty in FCKS kittens (see Colic, below).
Determining whether a kitten has FCKS or not can be difficult with only text descriptions: a mild case of FCKS causes the thorax to feel similar to the shape of a banana when held curve downward. The ribcage is not fixed in position, and the most noticeable effect in mild cases is the ridge along the side of the ribcage.
The condition causes weight-gain to halt, respiratory distress, inability to feed normally and, in a significant proportion of cases, death. However, since a significant percentage of kittens survive the condition immediate euthanasia is not indicated, and supportive treatments can be employed to increase the likelihood of survival (see Treatment, below).
The condition is often misdiagnosed as Pectus excavatum, with which it has no direct connection, although FCKS kittens may also have PE. Although the condition is believed to be more prevalent in the Burmese breed it is found in every breed of cat, including non-pedigree domestic cats, and the apparent prevalence in the Burmese is most likely due to better communication between breeders and reporting of the condition, as well as the naturally more barrel-shaped chest of this particular genotype. Since early reporting of the condition identified the Burmese as susceptible the Bengal breed, with a similar physiology, has emerged, and shows a similarly large number of FCKS kittens, however this may be due to specific interest in the condition among those working with the breeds. It is reported in all breeds and in domestic non-pedigree cats, both those kept as pets and those living as 'barn cats'. An article in a Swedish cat club newsletter about FCKS led to a spike in reporting of the condition in Ragdolls in Sweden.
The syndrome is life-threatening in a significant number of cases (possibly around 40%) mainly due to a lack of understanding of the underlying cause of the condition, failure to treat colic (leading to slow starvation) and insufficient sources of information in veterinary literature.

Treatment
Treatment is difficult to define given the number of different causes and the wealth of anecdotal information collected by and from cat breeders. Treatments have hitherto been based on the assumption that FCKS is caused by a muscular spasm, and their effectiveness is impossible to assess because some kittens will recover spontaneously without intervention. FCKS cannot be corrected surgically.
Diaphragmatic spasm is easily tested for and treated by short term interruption of the phrenic nerve. The nerve runs down the outside of the neck where the neck joins to the shoulder, within a bundle of muscles and tendons at this junction. The cluster can be pinched gently and held for a few seconds each time. Kittens with spasmodic FCKS will show almost immediate improvement, but the treatment may need to be repeated several times over a few days as the spasm may have a tendency to recur, particularly after suckling. It is sometimes evident that the spasm only affects one side of the diaphragm, as interruption of the nerve is only necessary or effective on one side.
Continuous positive air pressure (CPAP) is used in human babies with lung collapse, but this is impossible with kittens. It is possible that the success of some breeders in curing kittens by splinting the body, thus putting pressure on the ribcage, was successful as it has created the effect of positive air pressure, thus gradually re-inflating the lungs by pulling them open rather than pushing them open as is the case with CPAP (see below).
Drugs
The use of steroids (dexamethasone) coupled with an antibiotic (amoxicillin) will support the kitten in a number of ways, the steroid enhancing maturation and the antibiotic addressing the possibility of underlying infection and compensating for the immuno-depressant properties of the steroid. The steroid will also encourage the kitten to feed more energetically, keeping its weight up. However, the primary supportive mechanism must be nutritional. Kittens who are only supported with feeding and do not receive drugs seem to have a similar prognosis to those receiving drugs. Drug treatment cannot be used to replace nutritional support (i.e. supplementary feeding). Two breeders having read the report by Sturgess et al (which was inconclusive) believe that taurine plays a part in the condition. These breeders give the queen large doses of taurine (1000 mg) daily until the kittens recover – apparently within a few days. Long-term use of high doses of taurine should be monitored by a veterinarian.
Kittens have a much higher metabolism than adults, so drugs cannot simply be calibrated based on adult protocols but adjusted for weight. Antibiotics administered 2x daily in adults need to be given 3x daily in kittens, and doses given at 24-hour intervals in adults need to be given at 18- to 20-hour intervals in kittens. In addition, because the liver does not metabolise drugs as efficiently as in adults, a higher dose relative to body weight may need to be given. Little information is available in veterinary literature about drug dosing in neonates; almost all treatment protocols are based on adult animals. The neonatal human literature is here used as a guide. See Lawrence C. Ku and P. Brian Smith, 'Dosing in neonates: Special considerations in physiology and trial design' and multiple other sources of information. Observation of drug responses in neonatal kittens indicates increased frequency is essential.
Splinting and physical therapy
Splinting the kitten in a specially-constructed corset made from a rigid material such as a toilet roll, section of plastic bottle or high-density foam encourages the ribcage to a more normal position, and reported mortality seemed to decline when this practice was introduced. This may be because encouraging the chest to a more correct position helps the lungs to re-inflate. However a large proportion of kittens cannot tolerate a splint, and the distress it causes is extremely counterproductive. It can also be dangerous in cases where pressure on the sides causes the sternum to move inwards rather than outwards, and should only be undertaken with veterinary support and advice. Some kittens recover without intervention, so it is not known whether the various treatments based on encouraging the thorax to return to a normal shape contributed to recovery.
Some breeders have found that applying manual pressure to the sides of the ribcage can help, as the chest rounds out with encouragement (gentle pressure timed to coincide with the natural movement of the thorax in breathing), but usually the chest goes flat again as soon as massage is discontinued. It may however help in encouraging the lungs to inflate a little more with each breath, but should not be used if it causes distress to the kitten. Many breeders report that affected kittens seem to enjoy massage. Encouraging a kitten to lie on its side can be helpful, and draping another kitten (or the mother's arm) over it while it is sleeping on its side places a gentle continuous pressure on the ribcage which may also be helpful. If the kitten is uncomfortable it will move away. (It is important to ensure that pressure is not placed on the kitten if it is lying flat on its chest.)
Over-handling FCKS kittens can lead to unnecessary weight loss and lethargy, so the use of massage, waking the kitten for extra feeds from the mother etc. should be checked against gains and losses in weight. Some vets believe that encouraging the kitten to cry and also to have to move more to reach its mother may be helpful. There is no data from breeders supporting this theory.