Toxocariasis

Signs and symptoms
Physiological reactions to Toxocara infection depend on the host's immune response and the parasitic load. Most cases of Toxocara infection are asymptomatic, especially in adults. When symptoms do occur, they are the result of migration of second stage Toxocara larvae through the body.
Covert toxocariasis is the least serious of the three syndromes and is believed to be due to chronic exposure. Signs and symptoms of covert toxocariasis are coughing, fever, abdominal pain, headaches, and changes in behavior and ability to sleep. Upon medical examination, wheezing, hepatomegaly, and lymphadenitis are often noted.
High parasitic loads or repeated infection can lead to visceral larva migrans (VLM). VLM is primarily diagnosed in young children, because they are more prone to exposure and ingestion of infective eggs. Toxocara infection commonly resolves itself within weeks, but chronic eosinophilia may result.  In VLM, larvae migration incites inflammation of internal organs and sometimes the central nervous system. Symptoms depend on the organs affected. Patients can present with pallor, fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, fever, headache, skin rash, cough, asthma, chest tightness, increased irritability, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Sometimes the subcutaneous migration tracks of the larvae can be seen. Patients are commonly diagnosed with pneumonia, bronchospasms, chronic pulmonary inflammation, hypereosinophilia, hepatomegaly, hypergammaglobulinaemia (IgM, IgG, and IgE classes), leukocytosis, and elevated anti-A and anti-B isohaemagglutinins. Severe cases have occurred in people who are hypersensitive to allergens; in rare cases, epilepsy, inflammation of the heart, pleural effusion, respiratory failure, and death have resulted from VLM.
Ocular larva migrans (OLM) is rare compared with VLM. A light Toxocara burden is thought to induce a low immune response, allowing a larva to enter the host's eye. Although there have been cases of concurrent OLM and VLM, these are extremely exceptional. OLM often occurs in just one eye and from a single larva migrating into and encysting within the orbit. Loss of vision occurs over days or weeks. Other signs and symptoms are red eye, white pupil, fixed pupil, retinal fibrosis, retinal detachment, inflammation of the eye tissues, retinal granulomas, and strabismus. Ocular granulomas resulting from OLM are frequently misdiagnosed as retinoblastomas. Toxocara damage in the eye is permanent and can result in blindness.
A case study published in 2008 supported the hypothesis that eosinophilic cellulitis may also be caused by infection with Toxocara.  In this study, the adult patient presented with eosinophilic cellulitis, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, and a positive ELISA for T. canis.

Diagnosis
Finding Toxocara larvae within a patient is the only definitive diagnosis for toxocariasis; however, biopsies to look for second stage larvae in humans are generally not very effective. PCR, ELISA, and serological testing are more commonly used to diagnose Toxocara infection.  Serological tests are dependent on the number of larvae within the patient, and are unfortunately not very specific. ELISAs are much more reliable and currently have a 78% sensitivity and a 90% specificity. A 2007 study announced an ELISA specific to Toxocara canis, which will minimize false positives from cross reactions with similar roundworms and will help distinguish if a patient is infected with T. canis or T. cati. OLM is often diagnosed after a clinical examination. Granulomas can be found throughout the body and can be visualized using ultrasound, MRI, and CT technologies.

Treatment
Toxocariasis will often resolve itself, because the Toxocara larvae cannot mature within human hosts. Corticosteroids are prescribed in severe cases of VLM or if the patient is diagnosed with OLM.  Either albendazole (preferred) or mebendazole (“second line therapy”) may be prescribed. Granulomas can be surgically removed, or laser photocoagulation and cryoretinopexy can be used to destroy ocular granulomas.
Visceral toxocariasis in humans can be treated with antiparasitic drugs such as albendazole or mebendazole, tiabendazole or diethylcarbamazine usually in combination with anti-inflammatory medications. Steroids have been utilized with some positive results. Anti-helminthic therapy is reserved for severe infections (lungs, brain) because therapy may induce, due to massive larval killing, a strong inflammatory response. Treatment of ocular toxocariasis is more difficult and usually consists of measures to prevent progressive damage to the eye.